docs: Certificate Defaults Tutorial (#1279)
cert-manager/website: content/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/README.md

---
title: Learn how to set Certificate defaults automatically
description: |
  Learn how to use Kyverno ClusterPolicy to set default values for cert-manager Certificates.
---

*Last Verified: 08 September 2023*

> There has been a long standing [issue](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/issues/2239) in [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) about how to set default values on Certificate resources, also known in the issue as presets. In this tutorial we will walk through using [Kyverno](https://kyverno.io/), an open source policy tool to help us setup some useful defaults for our user's Certificates. 

Author: Thank you, I removed this section and have rewritten to be simpler and less historical. So hopefully this is resolved in my next commit.

As cert-manager has developed over the years, defaults have been set with the primary goal of backwards compatibility in mind.
Sometimes this can mean that a default value is perhaps less than ideal for your setup.
Changing any of these in the code base becomes a tricky balance of avoiding any negative effects from consumers who have come to rely on the existing default behavior, and promoting a better default value for either security or performance reasons.

> **Note:** All resources provided are demonstrative and should be reviewed properly before using in production environments.

# 1 - Prerequisites

**💻 Software**

1. [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl): The Kubernetes
command-line tool which allows you to configure Kubernetes clusters.
1. [helm](https://helm.sh/): A package manager for Kubernetes.
1. [yq](https://github.com/mikefarah/yq#install): A command line tool for
parsing YAML with helpful coloring.
1. [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) (**OPTIONAL**): For creating a local Kubernetes environment that runs in docker or other container runtime.

# 2 - Environment Setup

Follow these steps to setup an environment to follow along:

> > **Please note**: This is not a production setup.

Author: I copied some of your examples thank you. I may need to tweak a few more instances, but want to see it first on the preview.

1. Create a cluster environment for this demo. Skip this step if you already have an environment

    ```shell
    kind create cluster --name defaults
    ```

1. Install both cert-manager & Kyverno in the cluster

    ```shell
    # Set the chart versions we will use
    export CERT_MANAGER_CHART_VERSION="v1.12.3" KYVERNO_CHART_VERSION="3.0.5"
    # Install Kyverno with helm
    helm upgrade --install kyverno kyverno --namespace kyverno-system --version $KYVERNO_CHART_VERSION --create-namespace --repo https://kyverno.github.io/kyverno/
    # Install cert-manager with helm
    helm upgrade --install cert-manager cert-manager --namespace cert-manager --version $CERT_MANAGER_CHART_VERSION --set installCRDs=true --create-namespace --repo https://charts.jetstack.io/
    ```

    > For full installation instructions, please refer to the following links:
    > - [cert-manager installation instructions](./../../../docs/installation/helm.md)
    > - [kyverno installation instructions](https://kyverno.io/docs/installation/methods/#install-kyverno-using-helm)

# 3 - What defaults will we apply

> We are going to look only at setting fields inside the `Certificate` specification and not other cert-manager CRDs. We will also split this walkthrough into two sections:
> 
> 1. Default settings for optional fields.
> 2. Default settings for required fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial you will learn how to set defaults for `Certificate` resources.
The tutorial has two parts. 
In part 1 you will learn how to set defaults for optional fields and 
in part 2 you will learn a slightly more advanced technique which allows you to set defaults for required fields.

> ℹ️ It is also possible to set defaults for other resources like Issuer and ClusterIssuer but that is left as an exercise for the reader.
```

Only a suggestion ^^

We will setup some `ClusterPolicy` resources and `Certificate` resources in this guide. 
We will make reference to a `ClusterIssuer` in the `Certificate` spec that doesn't exist, but for this tutorial the issuer is not required as we won't actually be requesting certificates.
That means anyone can walk through this guide even without their own domain.

> We are also demoing this using a cluster scoped `ClusterPolicy` for ease of getting started.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make it easy to get started, we are also demoing this using a cluster scoped `ClusterPolicy`.
```

You can scope your defaults to the namespace level through the use of `Policy` resources in the future.

## Optional field defaults

> Lets set some simple fields, fields that you might find you either don't know to set or aren't really concerned about the consequences of setting them. So we will do this following "defaulting":

Author: I believe I have removed or reworded this section. But I did catch another `Lets` instance elsewhere.

    +    policies.kyverno.io/last-applied-patches: |
    +      set-privateKey-details.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/privateKey/encoding
    +      set-privateKey-rotationPolicy.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/privateKey
    +      set-revisionHistoryLimit.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/revisionHistoryLimit
    +  creationTimestamp: "2023-09-08T08:16:02Z"
    +  generation: 1
      name: test-revision
      namespace: default
    +  uid: 88a9a28a-c354-4397-be62-7eee30104fc6
    spec:
      dnsNames:
      - example.com
    @@ -10,4 +20,10 @@
        group: cert-manager.io
        kind: ClusterIssuer
        name: not-my-corp-issuer
    +  privateKey:
    +    algorithm: ECDSA
    +    encoding: PKCS1
    +    rotationPolicy: Always
    +    size: 521
    +  revisionHistoryLimit: 2
      secretName: test-revision-cert

>     \ No newline at end of file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Add a newline to the source file to avoid this warning.

Author: Caught this one, thank you.

    +  generation: 1
      name: test-revision-override
      namespace: default
    +  uid: 0e735662-8768-4dd7-ae7f-7f93674d08b8
    spec:
      dnsNames:
      - example.com
    ```

## Required field defaults

This section is a little more nuanced and requires a minor tweak to the default cert-manager installation to work. When a `Certificate` resource is applied to a Kubernetes cluster, mutating webhooks are applied before validating webhooks. When the existing cert-manager mutating webhook runs, if there is no value in a required field, it will add the required field with an empty value such as: `secretName: ""`. The consequence of this action is that our Kyverno policy will not apply as an empty value is already present.

There are some potential fixes for this issue:

1. Rename the 'cert-manager-webhook' mutating and validating webhooks with `z-<existing_name>` so that they execute last, after the Kyverno webhooks.

1. We fix cert-manager mutating webhook not mess with `Certificate` resource as in [this PR](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/pull/6311).

1. You use enforcement in your policy to explicitly override the value regardless of what the user sets.

> Option 1 seems to work but generally should be avoided as order cannot be counted on. Plus any mutating webhooks should be [idempotent](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/#best-practices-and-warnings). Option 3 defeats the point of allowing a user to override when needed, so discounted for this tutorial. That leaves us with option 2. We can manually apply this fix to our environment or now and in the future this step will be removed one [this PR](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/pull/6311) is merged and released.

Author: Corrected this one as suggested. Will go back and check for any more that may cause doubt.

    +      set-default-issuer-ref.1-mutate-certificate-required.kyverno.io: added /spec/issuerRef
    +      set-default-secret-name.1-mutate-certificate-required.kyverno.io: added /spec/secretName
    +      set-privateKey-details.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/privateKey/size
    +      set-privateKey-rotationPolicy.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/privateKey
    +      set-revisionHistoryLimit.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/revisionHistoryLimit
    +  creationTimestamp: "2023-09-08T10:05:44Z"
    +  generation: 1
      name: test-minimal
      namespace: default
    +  uid: 269a7194-8abe-4ed3-af7b-f21c3c2ee32e
    spec:
      dnsNames:
      - example.com
    +  issuerRef:
    +    group: cert-manager.io
    +    kind: ClusterIssuer
    +    name: our-corp-issuer
    +  privateKey:
    +    algorithm: ECDSA
    +    encoding: PKCS1
    +    rotationPolicy: Always
    +    size: 521
    +  revisionHistoryLimit: 2
    +  secretName: test-minimal-cert
    ```

    See how both Kyverno `ClusterPolicies` have been applied and resulted in all the other default values being inserted for us!

> 1. To be absolutely sure we have not enforced any settings, let us try and set every value of the `Certificate` explicitly, that we have a default rule for. We will use a final `Certificate` named "test-revision-override":

Author: This is me being terrible at my only fluent language. Thank you for pointing these out.
I hope I have addressed most of these now. I've tried to avoid using the term if there is a better alternative.

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f yamls/cert-test-revision-override.yaml --dry-run=server -o yaml | diff -uZ yamls/cert-test-revision-override.yaml -
    ```

    This should return:

    ```yaml
    --- yamls/cert-test-revision-override.yaml	2023-09-07 16:58:41.363648093 +0100
    +++ -	2023-09-08 11:09:16.026674875 +0100
    @@ -1,8 +1,14 @@
    apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
    kind: Certificate
    metadata:
    +  annotations:
    +    kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration: |
    +      {"apiVersion":"cert-manager.io/v1","kind":"Certificate","metadata":{"annotations":{},"name":"test-revision-override","namespace":"default"},"spec":{"dnsNames":["example.com"],"issuerRef":{"group":"cert-manager.io","kind":"ClusterIssuer","name":"not-my-corp-issuer"},"privateKey":{"algorithm":"RSA","encoding":"PKCS8","rotationPolicy":"Never","size":4096},"revisionHistoryLimit":44,"secretName":"test-revision-override-cert"}}
    +  creationTimestamp: "2023-09-08T10:09:16Z"
    +  generation: 1
      name: test-revision-override
      namespace: default
    +  uid: f9269c72-828c-4647-988c-1fee1e38afe0
    spec:
      dnsNames:
      - example.com
    ```

>     From this command you can see that again, none of the `Certificate` specification fields have been changed. Only the metadata section which tells us the policies hasve applied but not set any defaults, because values were already provided. So you maintain the flexibility to set what you need.

Author: Thank you, I went with:

```
From this command you can see that, none ...
```

"again" seemed needless

---
title: Setting default certificate values
description: |
  Explore how we can use open-source solutions to provide default

>   values to Certificate resources without enforcing them.

Reviewer: Here's how this looks when someone shares the link:
 
<img width="607" alt="image" src="https://github.com/cert-manager/website/assets/978965/2a72c396-d0cf-4bd7-870a-b0e6613ed1f1">

I suggest changing the title / description to:
> Learn how to set best-practice Certificate defaults automatically
> 
> Learn how to use Kyverno ClusterPolicy to automatically set best-practice default  field values on all cert-manager Certificate resources.

...or something like that.

Author: I edited based on your thoughts. See what you think of attempt no. 2

> **Note:** All resources provided are demonstrative and should be reviewed properly before using in production environments.

## Prerequisites

**💻 Software**

1. [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl): The Kubernetes
command-line tool which allows you to configure Kubernetes clusters.
1. [helm](https://helm.sh/): A package manager for Kubernetes.
1. [yq](https://github.com/mikefarah/yq#install): A command line tool for
parsing YAML with helpful coloring.
1. [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) (**OPTIONAL**): For creating a local Kubernetes environment that runs in docker or other container runtime.

## Setup

Follow these steps to setup an environment to follow along:

> **Please note**: This is not a production setup.

1. Create a cluster environment for this demo. Skip this step if you already have an environment

    ```shell
    kind create cluster --name defaults
    ```

1. Now install both cert-manager & Kyverno tools

    ```shell
    # Set the chart version we will use
    export CERT_MANAGER_CHART_VERSION="v1.12.3" KYVERNO_CHART_VERSION="3.0.5"
    # Install Kyverno with helm

>     helm upgrade --install kyverno kyverno/kyverno --version $KYVERNO_CHART_VERSION --namespace kyverno-system --create-namespace

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can add the two commands:

```bash
helm repo add --force-update jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
helm repo add --force-update kyverno https://kyverno.github.io/kyverno/
```

>     helm upgrade --install kyverno kyverno/kyverno --version $KYVERNO_CHART_VERSION --namespace kyverno-system --create-namespace

Author: I changed the command to use the --repo flag instead to cover off this issue.

    # Install cert-manager with helm

>     helm upgrade --install cert-manager jetstack/cert-manager --namespace cert-manager --version $CERT_MANAGER_CHART_VERSION --set installCRDs=true --create-namespace

Author: I changed the command to use the `--repo` flag instead to cover off this issue.

      - name: set-privateKey-details
        match:
          any:
          - resources:
              kinds:
              - Certificate
        mutate:
          patchStrategicMerge:
            spec:
              privateKey:
                +(algorithm): ECDSA
                +(size): 521
                +(encoding): PKCS1
    ```

1. Apply the policy to the cluster and check it is ready:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f yamls/cpol-mutate-certificate-defaults.yaml
    kubectl get cpol
    ```
    
    When ready the output should look like this:

    ```log
    NAME                            BACKGROUND   VALIDATE ACTION   READY   AGE   MESSAGE
    0-mutate-certificate-defaults   true         Audit             True    4s    Ready
    ```

1. Now inspect the `Certificate` for testing with the name "test-revision":

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
    kind: Certificate
    metadata:
      name: test-revision
      namespace: default
    spec:
      dnsNames:
      - example.com
      issuerRef:
        group: cert-manager.io
        kind: ClusterIssuer
        name: not-my-corp-issuer
      secretName: test-revision-cert
    ```

>     You can see that we have set the most minimal configuration possible, sepcifying only a DNS name for the certificate, where to save it (`secretName`) and the issuer to use to request the certificate (`issuerRef`).

Author: Not sure how that slipped through, but thank you for noticing. Corrected.

          {"apiVersion":"cert-manager.io/v1","kind":"Certificate","metadata":{"annotations":{},"name":"test-revision","namespace":"default"},"spec":{"dnsNames":["example.com"],"issuerRef":{"group":"cert-manager.io","kind":"ClusterIssuer","name":"not-my-corp-issuer"},"secretName":"test-revision-cert"}}
        policies.kyverno.io/last-applied-patches: |
          set-privateKey-details.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/privateKey/size
          set-privateKey-rotationPolicy.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/privateKey
          set-revisionHistoryLimit.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/revisionHistoryLimit
      creationTimestamp: "2023-08-29T17:36:35Z"
      generation: 1
      name: test-revision
      namespace: default
      uid: 11c2ccb0-e1a8-4b44-b09e-41c434c823fd
    spec:
      dnsNames:
      - example.com
      issuerRef:
        group: cert-manager.io
        kind: ClusterIssuer
        name: not-my-corp-issuer
      privateKey:
        algorithm: ECDSA
        encoding: PKCS1
        rotationPolicy: Always
        size: 521
      revisionHistoryLimit: 2
      secretName: test-revision-cert
    ```

> 1. We have successfully defaulted the `privateKey` and `revisionHistoryLimit` fields. Let's actually override all of these to validate that we can still set what we want as an end user. Here is a new `Certificate` resource to use fro testing called "test-revision-override":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. We have successfully defaulted the `privateKey` and `revisionHistoryLimit` fields. Let's actually override all of these to validate that we can still set what we want as an end user. Here is a new `Certificate` resource to use for testing called "test-revision-override":
```

    ```

    An example output:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
    kind: Certificate
    metadata:
      annotations:
        kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration: |
          {"apiVersion":"cert-manager.io/v1","kind":"Certificate","metadata":{"annotations":{},"name":"test-revision-override","namespace":"default"},"spec":{"dnsNames":["example.com"],"issuerRef":{"group":"cert-manager.io","kind":"ClusterIssuer","name":"not-my-corp-issuer"},"privateKey":{"algorithm":"RSA","encoding":"PKCS8","rotationPolicy":"Never","size":4096},"revisionHistoryLimit":44,"secretName":"test-revision-override-cert"}}
      creationTimestamp: "2023-08-29T17:39:55Z"
      generation: 1
      name: test-revision-override
      namespace: default
      uid: 26637271-afb3-46b8-b4ce-eb3336ce1b9f
    spec:
      dnsNames:
      - example.com
      issuerRef:
        group: cert-manager.io
        kind: ClusterIssuer
        name: not-my-corp-issuer
      privateKey:
        algorithm: RSA
        encoding: PKCS8
        rotationPolicy: Never
        size: 4096
      revisionHistoryLimit: 44
      secretName: test-revision-override-cert
    ```

> 

Reviewer: Stopping here. 

* All those commands above work well.
* I spotted another typo.
* Perhaps this first part of the content can be merged now and the content below can be added to a separate PR after 1.13 is released with your fix for the mutating webhook.
* Maybe write something about what "sane defaults" are recommended by the cert-manager team and explain why those are not the out-of-the-box defaults....here or in another PR?

Author: > Maybe write something about what "sane defaults" are recommended by the cert-manager team and explain why those are not the out-of-the-box defaults....here or in another PR?

I love that - will add a section. Might need your input after my first draft

> Perhaps this first part of the content can be merged now and the content below can be added to a separate PR after 1.13 is released with your fix for the mutating webhook.

I have another section to add with ingress-shim. So I'll see when I complete this, probably after 1.13 so I can clean up that setion, or make reference to.. run 1.13 or read here ..

Author: In the latest revision I am now able to move the <= v1.13 stuff to an appendix to make the tutorial flow better.
Added v1.14.X as a req for the tutorial.

# Cleanup

If you created the kind cluster for this tutorial you can simply run:

```shell
kind delete cluster --name defaults
```

Otherwise to remove all resources deployed in this tutorial:

```shell
# Assuming you are running from this directly or saved all the files to yamls/
kubectl delete -f ingress.yaml
kubectl delete -f cpol-mutate-certificates-1.yaml
helm uninstall kyverno -n kyverno-system
helm uninstall cert-manager -n cert-manager
helm uninstall ingress-nginx -n ingress-nginx
```

# Appendix

## cert-manager version requirement

The behavior of cert-manager's mutating webhook has been changed from v1.14.x onward.
For a more complete explanation and details of the change please refer to [PR #6311](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/pull/6311).
Instructions for a manual fix can be found [in this comment on PR #6311](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/pull/6311#issuecomment-1889517418).

## Presets Feature Request

For further background reading around setting "defaults" or "presets", you can refer to [issue 2239](ttps://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/issues/2239).

> This tutorial came out of an investigation of that issue.

Reviewer: Broken link to CertificatePresets issue

@hawksight I just noticed this broken link while reading the live docs. 
Sorry I missed it during review.

That somewhere else could be in the cert-manager code base, or indeed by the issuer that creates and returns the X.509 certificate.
Let's explore how we can manipulate these values to be something custom and make the `Certificate` user's life easier.

We will set up some `ClusterPolicy` resources and `Certificate` resources in this tutorial. 
We will make reference to a `ClusterIssuer` in the `Certificate` spec that doesn't exist, but for this tutorial the `ClusterIssuer` is not required as we will not actually be requesting certificates.
That means anyone can follow this tutorial even without their own domain.

> ⚠️ To make it easy to get started we are using cluster scoped `ClusterPolicy` resources.
> You can scope your defaults to the namespace level through the use of `Policy` resources in the future, but that will not be covered in this tutorial.

## 1 - Defaulting optional fields

In this section we will create rules which set 3 fields for all `Certificate` resources automatically.
None of the 3 fields here are required fields, but they might need to be set depending on platform and issuer preferences.
These rules will:

> - Set a default value of: `revisionHistoryLimit: 2`.

Author: I didn't put too much thought into what these values should be. The tutorial is showing how to set custom values, not what those values should be. This should be up to the consumer who takes this tutorial as inspiration.

If we fix [#6418](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/issues/6418) in the future, the default would be `1` already and the tutorial would be out of date. Using `2` would mean we wouldn't have to revisit this tutorial and revise the use case.

I don't think it matters too much what the value is, as long as it is not the current default of cert-manager. I can of course change it to `1` if you think it's really important to be setting good practice here though.

> - Set a default value of: `revisionHistoryLimit: 2`.

Reviewer: I do think it's important, but I'm happy to give way.
I feel like  the subtitle of this tutorial should be "How to set Sane Defaults for Certificate Resources".

> - Set a default value of: `revisionHistoryLimit: 2`.

Author: Maybe either an addendum or reference to what we consider sane defaults would be better, an example policy.
With the new docs structure, perhaps we can add a section [her](https://cert-manager.io/docs/policy/defaulting/) referencing what we consider a "sane defaults" policy would be?

> - Set a default value of: `revisionHistoryLimit: 2`.

Author: Regarding sane defaults, put another issue #1388 to cover that.

- Set a default value of `Always` under `spec.privateKey.rotationPolicy`.

> - Set defaults for all `spec.privateKey` fields.

Author: Should we create another issue on the website to account for adding this extra documentation?

> - Set defaults for all `spec.privateKey` fields.

Author: https://github.com/cert-manager/website/issues/1388

    ```
    🔗 <a href="cpol-mutate-certificate-required.yaml">`cpol-mutate-certificate-required.yaml`</a>

1. Apply this policy:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f cpol-mutate-certificate-required.yaml
    ```

    You should now see two `ClusterPolicy` resources if you run:

    ```shell
    kubectl get cpol
    ```

    Example:

    ```shell
    NAME                            ADMISSION   BACKGROUND   VALIDATE ACTION   READY   AGE    MESSAGE
    0-mutate-certificate-defaults   true        true         Audit             True    3m6s   Ready
    1-mutate-certificate-required   true        true         Audit             True    4s     Ready
    ```

1. Patch the previous policy we applied to disable schema validation after mutation:

    ```shell
    kubectl patch cpol 0-mutate-certificate-defaults --type=merge -p '{"spec":{"schemaValidation": false}}'
    ```

    > ⚠️ Read about the schema validation setting before using this elsewhere. 
    > We have disabled schema validation here because we have two policies both affecting `Certificates`. Cert-manager will validate the resolved resource with the `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` resource after all mutations are applied.

>     > You could avoid this completely by using one policy with all required mutation rules.

Author: This is a fair point, it introduces complexity that could be avoided. I like your suggestions, so I will try to implement those:

> This second part of the tutorial could use a separate file but with the same ClusterPolicy name.
> The instructions could suggest using diff to see what additions have been made to the file.

    This shows that you retain the flexibility to override the cluster defaults when needed.

## 3 - Defaulting through Ingress Annotations

Many cert-manager users don't create `Certificate` resources directly and instead use the [ingress-shim](https://cert-manager.io/docs/usage/ingress/) functionality.
cert-manager creates `Certificate` resources based on the [supported annotations](https://cert-manager.io/docs/usage/ingress/#supported-annotations) and the `Ingress` specification.
Let's see how we can still use `ClusterPolicy` to apply our defaults in this use case.

1. Check the example `Ingress` resource has the correct annotation to select an `Issuer` or `ClusterIssuer`:

    ```yaml file=../../../../public/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/ingress.yaml
    ```
    🔗 <a href="ingress.yaml">`ingress.yaml`</a>

1. This annotation and the relevant `ingress.spec.tls` configuration are all we need:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f ingress.yaml
    ```

1. Now validate that the `Certificate` resource was automatically generated:

    ```shell

>     kubectl get cert defaults-example-certificate-tls -o yaml | yq

Author: Good point, I only used it once as you suggest. Just my workflow to have colours. Removing.

    I0109 10:43:48.622253       1 event_broadcaster.go:318] "Event occurred" object="0-mutate-certificate-defaults" kind="ClusterPolicy" apiVersion="kyverno.io/v1" type="Normal" reason="PolicyApplied" action="Resource Mutated" note="Certificate default/defaults-example-certificate-tls is successfully mutated"
    ```

    The key lines you should see are:

    ```log
    "Event occurred" object="0-mutate-certificate-defaults" kind="ClusterPolicy" apiVersion="kyverno.io/v1" type="Normal" reason="PolicyApplied" action="Resource Mutated" note="Certificate default/defaults-example-certificate-tls is successfully mutated"
    ```

    See the `object` key indicates that our policy has been applied.
    In the `note` section you can identify that it was applied to the `Certificate` resource that was created by cert-manager based on the `Ingress` resource that we applied.

Whilst you are not able to default the `secretName` and `issuerRef` fields when using the ingress-shim, you can default all other fields. 

> This is reasonable given that the `Ingress` specification needs to know what `Secret` to mount to the ingress controller.

Author: I've reworded it. My objective was that despite the Ingress part of this guide being after the defaulting of required fields, the rules for requried fields don't really play a part in the ingress section.

I hope the newer wording does a better job of explaining that.

> **Note**: The `ClusterIssuer` can be defaulted by supplying an install time parameter to cert-manager. 
> See [cert-manager documentation](../../usage/ingress.md#optional-configuration) for full details. 

> > You would still need to provide at least one annotation, however this time it is static and doesn't need to be defaulted.

Author: Yes, I was thinking that [this optional configuration](https://cert-manager.io/docs/usage/ingress/#optional-configuration) was worth a mention, in that you could reduce a user's knowledge of `Issuer` and `ClusterIssuers` further by using just the `kubernetes.io/tls-acme: "true"` as opposed to the one I used here: `cert-manager.io/cluster-issuer: "our-corp-issuer"`

But again that's sort of an addendum to the tutorial and not really the core focus here.
Perhaps this is more operational best practice as the access to resources could tie into RBAC and how the platform team manages to Certificate provisioning lifecycle.

# Summary

This is a fairly simple example of how easy it can be to setup *defaults* for your cluster `Certificate` resources. 
We've shown how a `ClusterPolicy` doesn't have to "enforce" settings, rather it can be used to set and extend the default options. 
`Certificate` users can reduce their YAML, whilst maintaining the flexibility to override any value when needed. 

We have shown how a few simple policies can change the user experience creating `Certificate` resources from:

```yaml file=../../../../public/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/cert-test-revision-override.yaml
```
🔗 <a href="cert-test-revision-override.yaml">`cert-test-revision-override.yaml`</a>

To instead only need to specify the configuration important to them, for example:

```yaml file=../../../../public/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/cert-test-minimal.yaml
```
🔗 <a href="cert-test-minimal.yaml">`cert-test-minimal.yaml`</a>

> With these policies we achieved our objective and have enabled users to submit minimal `Certifiate` resources, with only a single field contained within the specification, the `dnsNames` entry.

Author: Just trying to word this as an additional use case:

```markdown
- **To enable users to request a certificate by providing only a domain name**

    Use a `ClusterPolicy` to set all other required `Certificate.spec` fields.
```

Would that suggestion cover it. Or should I be specific here and word it as:

```markdown
- **To enable users to request a certificate by providing only a `Certificate.spec.dnsNames` field**

    Use a `ClusterPolicy` to set all other required `Certificate.spec` fields that cert-manager expects for `CertificateRequest` creation.
```

> With these policies we achieved our objective and have enabled users to submit minimal `Certifiate` resources, with only a single field contained within the specification, the `dnsNames` entry.

Reviewer 2: > Make application developers' lives easier by allowing them to create secure X.509 TLS certificates with the minimum of configuration.

Every other specified field was automatically defaulted using Kyverno with `ClusterPolicy` which would typically be setup by a platform administrator.

You may have noticed in the second Kyverno `ClusterPolicy` that we used some `Certificate` resource metadata to create the `secretName` field.

> You can read more about this in the [Kyverno documentation](https://kyverno.io/docs/writing-policies/variables/#variables-from-admission-review-requests). 

Author: I've moved the link to kyverno docs into the resource itself as a comment.

---
title: Learn how to set Certificate defaults automatically
description: |
  Learn how to use Kyverno ClusterPolicy to set default values for cert-manager Certificates cluster wide.
---

*Last Verified: 05 January 2024*

# Objective

We will set up a cluster where a user specifies as little YAML as possible in `Certificate` resources.
This will be achieved by utilizing Kyverno to apply custom "default" values to the `Certificate` fields, that are not specified by a user.

There are some benefits to having defaults:

- Users minimize their `Certificate` YAML resource.

> - Users maintain flexibility to override fields when needed.

Author: Changing context to:

```markdown
- `Certificate` consumers minimize their YAML resources.
- `Certificate` consumers retain flexibility to override fields when needed.
```

Thanks for all the options, I think these short sentences are better when using `consumers` instead.

- Cluster operators can decide what the default should be, rather than having to rely on an in-built defaults from cert-manager.

## Use cases

By setting custom defaults across our cluster, we enable platform teams to tackle use case such as:

> - **You want ensure that CertificateRequest resources get cleaned up.**

Author: Good point, remove `You want` as not necessary here.

> - **You want ensure that CertificateRequest resources get cleaned up.**

Author: Yep consistency needed here.

- **You want to help your users choose secure default key settings for their `Certificate` resources.**

    Use a `ClusterPolicy` to set custom default values for the `Certificate.Spec.PrivateKey` fields.

- **You want to default the `Issuer` for users within the cluster.**

    Use a `ClusterPolicy` to set a custom default for the `Certificate.spec.issuerRef` fields.

## Process

We will setup defaults for three different scenarios, getting slightly more advanced each time:

1. Defaulting optional `Certificate` resource fields.
2. Defaulting required `Certificate` resource fields.
3. Defaulting `Certificate` resource fields when using `Ingress` annotations to request certificates.

# Setup

## Prerequisites

**💻 Software**

1. [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl): The Kubernetes
  command-line tool which allows you to configure Kubernetes clusters.
1. [helm](https://helm.sh/): A package manager for Kubernetes.
1. [yq](https://github.com/mikefarah/yq#install): A command line tool for
  parsing YAML with helpful coloring.
1. [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) (**OPTIONAL**): For creating a local

>   Kubernetes environment that runs in docker or other container runtime.

Author: I was copying an example referenced by @wallrj previously, in the raw content of [this file](https://github.com/cert-manager/website/blob/master/content/docs/tutorials/getting-started-aks-letsencrypt/README.md) but you are right it is probably not needed. I'll remove and double check.

1. Let's first take a look at the `ClusterPolicy`:

    ```yaml file=../../../../public/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/cpol-mutate-certificate-defaults.yaml
    ```
    🔗 <a href="cpol-mutate-certificate-defaults.yaml">`cpol-mutate-certificate-defaults.yaml`</a>

1. Apply the policy to the cluster and check that it is ready:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f cpol-mutate-certificate-defaults.yaml
    kubectl get cpol
    ```
    
    When the `ClusterPolicy` is ready the output should look like this:

    ```log
    NAME                            BACKGROUND   VALIDATE ACTION   READY   AGE   MESSAGE
    0-mutate-certificate-defaults   true         Audit             True    4s    Ready
    ```

1. Now inspect the `Certificate` for testing with the name "test-revision":

    ```yaml file=../../../../public/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/cert-test-revision.yaml
    ```
    🔗 <a href="cert-test-revision.yaml">`cert-test-revision.yaml`</a>

    You can see that we have set the most minimal configuration currently possible, specifying only a DNS name for the certificate, where to save it (`secretName`) and the issuer to use to request the certificate (`issuerRef`).

> 1. Use the following command to dry-run apply the certificate and then `diff` it against the original resource, to see how the defaults from our `ClusterPolicy` are applied:

Author: Oh I see to italic those words :+1:  to highlight it is a dry-run

> 1. Use the following command to dry-run apply the certificate and then `diff` it against the original resource, to see how the defaults from our `ClusterPolicy` are applied:

Author: I left the comma in to make the sentence easier to read in two parts.

> 1. Use the following command to dry-run apply the certificate and then `diff` it against the original resource, to see how the defaults from our `ClusterPolicy` are applied:

Author: I also used single asterisk instead of underscore which has the same effect. All examples in [markdown docs](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#italic) use asterisks.

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f cert-test-revision.yaml --dry-run=server -o yaml | diff -uZ cert-test-revision.yaml -
    ```

    The output should look similar to this:

    ```shell
    --- yamls/cert-test-revision.yaml	2023-09-07 16:58:48.975541922 +0100
    +++ -	2023-09-08 09:16:02.151849668 +0100
    @@ -1,8 +1,18 @@
    apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
    kind: Certificate
    metadata:
    +  annotations:
    +    kubectl.kubernetes.io/last-applied-configuration: |
    +      {"apiVersion":"cert-manager.io/v1","kind":"Certificate","metadata":{"annotations":{},"name":"test-revision","namespace":"default"},"spec":{"dnsNames":["example.com"],"issuerRef":{"group":"cert-manager.io","kind":"ClusterIssuer","name":"not-my-corp-issuer"},"secretName":"test-revision-cert"}}
    +    policies.kyverno.io/last-applied-patches: |
    +      set-privateKey-details.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/privateKey/encoding
    +      set-privateKey-rotationPolicy.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/privateKey
    +      set-revisionHistoryLimit.0-mutate-certificate-defaults.kyverno.io: added /spec/revisionHistoryLimit

>     +  creationTimestamp: "2023-09-08T08:16:02Z"

Author: I'll see what others think here.
However this comment made me realise I need to replace this output now that Kyverno doesn't include the annotations anymore.

>     +  creationTimestamp: "2023-09-08T08:16:02Z"

Author: On this one (and subsequent example outputs) I think it's best to keep a real example including whatever the user of this tutorial should see.
It should be obvious that timestamps will differ and I'd prefer not to make the commands any longer or complicated.

    +  creationTimestamp: "2023-09-08T08:17:57Z"
    +  generation: 1
      name: test-revision-override
      namespace: default
    +  uid: 0e735662-8768-4dd7-ae7f-7f93674d08b8
    spec:
      dnsNames:
      - example.com
    ```

## 2 - Defaulting required fields

> ⚠️ This section requires cert-manager v1.14.X to work properly out of the box.
> If using an older version of cert-manager, see the [Appendix](#cert-manager-version-requirement) section for a full explanation.
>

Now we can set a Kyverno `ClusterPolicy` to apply default values to any of the `Certificate` fields.
This includes the *required* fields. 
In our example `ClusterPolicy` we will do two things:

- Apply a default `secretName` that is the name of the Certificate object suffixed with "-cert".
- Set the relevant `issuerRef` fields to default to using our `ClusterIssuer` named, "our-corp-issuer".

> > ℹ️ Note how the second rule is tackling the third of our [3 uses cases](#use-cases) set out above.

Author: Asked for clarity on what is preferred. Failing any convention, I will try to stick with `one`, `two` and `three` I think.

> > ℹ️ Note how the second rule is tackling the third of our [3 uses cases](#use-cases) set out above.

Author: Only answer was for text preference under ten (`10`). Already updated so marking this as complete.

    ```

1. Patch the previous policy we applied, to disable schema validation after mutation:

    ```shell
    kubectl patch cpol 0-mutate-certificate-defaults --type=merge -p '{"spec":{"schemaValidation": false}}'
    ```

    > ⚠️ Read about the schema validation setting before using this elsewhere. 
    > We have disabled it here because we have two policies both affecting `Certificates`. Cert-manager will validate the resolved resource with the `validatingwebhookconfigurations.admissionregistration.k8s.io`, after all mutations are applied.
    > You could avoid this completely by using one policy with all required mutation rules.
    >

1. Take a look at another new `Certificate` we have for validating that all our policies will now take effect. This time called "test-minimal":

    ```yaml file=../../../../public/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/cert-test-minimal.yaml
    ```
    🔗 <a href="cert-test-minimal.yaml">`cert-test-minimal.yaml`</a>

1. Dry run apply and `diff` to validate all our defaults have applied to this minimal `Certificate`:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f cert-test-minimal.yaml --dry-run=server -o yaml | diff -uZ cert-test-minimal.yaml -
    ```

>     An example succesful output:

Author: `The output of this command should result in something similar to:`

I didn't like going from command to output without something. That is my new suggestion, removing the `success` part. I agree in a tutorial, it would be expected that all commands do indeed work.

>     An example succesful output:

Reviewer 2: I can live with your proposal. Please use it consistently throughout.

      namespace: default
    +  uid: f9269c72-828c-4647-988c-1fee1e38afe0
    spec:
      dnsNames:
      - example.com
    ```

    From this command you can see that, none of the `Certificate` specification fields have been changed.
    Only the metadata section has changed which tells us the policies have applied but not set any defaults because values were already provided. 
    So you maintain the flexibility to override the cluster defaults when needed.

## 3 - Defaulting through Ingress Annotations

Many cert-manager users don't create `Certificate` resources directly and instead use the [ingress-shim](https://cert-manager.io/docs/usage/ingress/) functionality.
cert-manager creates `Certificate` resources based on the [supported annotations](https://cert-manager.io/docs/usage/ingress/#supported-annotations) and the `Ingress` specification.
Let's see how we can still use `ClusterPolicy` to apply our defaults in this use case.

1. Check the example `Ingress` resource has the correct annotation to select an `Issuer` or `ClusterIssuer`:

    ```yaml file=../../../../public/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/ingress.yaml
    ```
    🔗 <a href="ingress.yaml">`ingress.yaml`</a>

> 1. This annotation and the relevant `ingress.spec.tls` configuration is all we need:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. This annotation and the relevant `ingress.spec.tls` configuration are all we need:
```

Author: Little unsure here. I would agree `configurations are` when the first word is plural.
Unless the assumption is that `configuration` is a plural term, in that there are multiple fields in `ingress.spec.tls`, which is true,.
I've changed it as you suggest for now.

Reviewer 2: I'm reading it as "(annotation + configuration) are".

Author: That makes sense, I was too zoomed in on the end of the sentence. :)

We've shown how a `ClusterPolicy` doesn't have to "enforce" settings, rather it can be used to set and extend the default options. 
`Certificate` users can reduce their YAML, whilst maintaining the flexibility to override any value when needed. 

We have shown how a few simple policies can change the user experience creating `Certificate` resources from:

```yaml file=../../../../public/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/cert-test-revision-override.yaml
```
🔗 <a href="cert-test-revision-override.yaml">`cert-test-revision-override.yaml`</a>

To instead only need to specify the configuration important to them, for example:

```yaml file=../../../../public/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/cert-test-minimal.yaml
```
🔗 <a href="cert-test-minimal.yaml">`cert-test-minimal.yaml`</a>

With these policies we achieved our objective and have enabled users to submit minimal `Certifiate` resources, with only a single field contained within the specification, the `dnsNames` entry.
Every other specified field was automatically defaulted using Kyverno with `ClusterPolicy` which would typically be setup by a platform administrator.

> You may have noticed that in the second Kyverno `ClusterPolicy`, we actually used some `Certificate` resource metadata to create the `secretName` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may have noticed in the second Kyverno `ClusterPolicy` that we used some `Certificate` resource metadata to create the `secretName` field.
```

> You read more about this on the [Kyverno documentation](https://kyverno.io/docs/writing-policies/variables/#variables-from-admission-review-requests). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can read more about this in the [Kyverno documentation](https://kyverno.io/docs/writing-policies/variables/#variables-from-admission-review-requests). 
```

# Cleanup

If you created the kind cluster for this tutorial you can simply run:

```shell
kind delete cluster --name defaults
```

Otherwise to remove all resources deployed in this tutorial:

```shell
# Assuming you are running from this directly or saved all the files to yamls/
kubectl delete -f yamls/
helm uninstall kyverno -n kyverno-system
helm uninstall cert-manager -n cert-manager
helm uninstall ingress-nginx -n ingress-nginx
```

# Appendix

## cert-manager version requirement

> Prior to cert-manager version v1.14.X, cert-manager's `MutatingWebhookConfiguration` was trigger by all cert-manager.io resources including `Certificates`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prior to cert-manager version v1.14.X, cert-manager's `MutatingWebhookConfiguration` was triggered by all cert-manager.io resources including `Certificates`.
```

In reality this webhook is only in place to affect `CertificateRequest` resources, but had an unintended consequence that meant Kyverno policies as we had written would not operate as intended.

When a `Certificate` resource is applied to a Kubernetes cluster, mutating webhooks are applied before validating webhooks. 
When the existing cert-manager `MutatingWebhookConfiguration` runs it will add the required field with an empty value, such as: `secretName: ""`, if there is no value in a required field. 
The consequence of this action is that our Kyverno policies will not apply as an empty value is already present.

> Starting at v1.14.X the cert-manager-webhook `MutatingWebhookConfiguration` resource has been scoped back to only affect `CertificateRequest` resource. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with v1.14.x, the cert-manager-webhook `MutatingWebhookConfiguration` resource has been scoped to only affect `CertificateRequest` resources.
```

Reviewer 2: I should have called it out earlier, I prefer lowercase `.x` throughout.

Author: I just thought, should I not just use `v1.14` rather than `v1.14.x`?

It no longer triggers for `Certificate` resources, which our policies in this tutorial are acting on.

> If you are running a cert-manager installation prior to v1.14.X, then you will need to consider one of the following potential fixes for this issue:

Reviewer 2: The best option would be to upgrade...

Author: Agreed, directing the user to that first. Else try one of these options.

## 1 - Defaulting optional fields

In this section we will create rules which set three fields for all `Certificate` resources automatically.
None of the three fields here are required fields, but they might need to be set depending on platform and issuer preferences.
These rules will:

- Set a default value of: `revisionHistoryLimit: 2`.
- Set a [default value of `Always` under `spec.privateKey.rotationPolicy`](../../usage/certificate/#the-rotationpolicy-setting).
- Set defaults for all `spec.privateKey` fields.

> ℹ️ Note how these rules tackle the first two of our [uses cases](#use-cases).

1. First take a look at the `ClusterPolicy`:

    ```yaml file=../../../../public/docs/tutorials/certificate-defaults/cpol-mutate-certificates-0.yaml
    ```
    🔗 <a href="cpol-mutate-certificates-0.yaml">`cpol-mutate-certificates-0.yaml`</a>

1. Apply the policy to the cluster and check that it is ready:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f cpol-mutate-certificates-0.yaml
    kubectl get cpol
    ```
    
    When the `ClusterPolicy` is ready the output should look like this:

    ```log

>     NAME                            BACKGROUND   VALIDATE ACTION   READY   AGE   MESSAGE

Reviewer 2: did this line really not change its formatting to match the next line?

Author: Just fixed a couple minor CI fails and I'll check the latest preview deploy.
I do need to redo the output examples anyway due to the condensing of policies into one file.
